# Iowa Car Crash Data Analysis

### Overview
This is a project in which we perform data analysis to answer questions about car crashes in Iowa, using data from the Iowa Department of Transportation.

crash_data_raw.csv is a CSV file containing the complete original dataset on car crashes in Iowa starting in 2009, collected by the Iowa DOT.

crash_data_cleaned.xlsx is an Excel workbook containing the dataset cleaned and prepared for analysis. It also has worksheets containing a date table generated by Excel, and Iowa population data gathered from Macrotrends.

Interactive Crash Report.pbix is a Power BI report with pages allowing the user to view car crash data filtered by the severity of the crash, as well as by the year, the month, and the weekday.

The folder "CSV files" contains each of the worksheets from crash_data_cleaned.xlsx converted into CSV files, to be imported into MySQL for analysis.

The folder "Output Tables" contains various tables narrowed down & summarized from the full dataset using MySQL.

The folder "SQL Scripts" contains the scripts used in MySQL to create the corresponding output tables.

The folder "R Scripts" contains the scripts used in R to perform the data analysis for questions 1, 2, and 3.

### Data Analysis Questions
- Has the annual rate of car crashes changed significantly over the years since 2009? Which years have been the most/least deadly?
- Do more crashes occur during the week than on the weekend?
- Did car crashes decrease significantly during the year 2020, when COVID-related lockdowns occurred?
- In which months do the most crashes occur? The least? Which season is the most dangerous to drive in? Are there changes in the distribution of the severity of crashes during the year, in general?

### Data Sources
The data for this project was provided by the Iowa DOT, and by Macrotrends:

“Crashes in Iowa by Severity and Day.” Iowa Open Data, Iowa Department of Transportation, 26 Mar. 2024,  <https://data.iowa.gov/Crashes/Crashes-in-Iowa-by-Severity-and-Day/psra-mit2/about_data>. Retrieved 09 Apr. 2024.

“Iowa Population 1900-2023.” Macrotrends, Macrotrends LLC,  <https://www.macrotrends.net/global-metrics/states/iowa/population>. Retrieved 12 Apr. 2024.

### Data Cleaning
This dataset required relatively little cleaning to be prepared for analysis: the only notable change was renaming the columns to remove the spaces, so that potential issues importing the data into MySQL and R could be avoided.

### Tools Used
- Microsoft Excel and PowerQuery, for data cleaning and viewing.
- Microsoft Power BI, for creating the interactive visual report.
- MySQL, for writing and executing the queries needed to produce the pared-down output tables.
- RStudio, for performing statistical analysis on the data.
- Microsoft Word, for composing the final report.
